SOURCE: FDA Drug Shortages – Report to Congress
TITLE:  Eleventh Annual Report on Drug Shortages For Calendar Year 2023
YEAR:   2023
URL:    https://www.fda.gov/media/179156/download?attachment
========================================================================

[Page 1/30]
Report to Congress
Drug Shortages
CY 2023
(Required by Section 506C–1 of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act)

[Page 2/30]
Executive Summary
This annual report to Congress summarizes the major actions taken by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) during calendar year (CY) 2023 to prevent or
mitigate drug shortages1 in the United States. Because drug shortages can pose a
significant public health threat that can delay, and in some cases even deny, critically
needed care for patients, drug shortages remain a top priority for FDA.
FDA closely monitors the medical product supply chain, which continued to be impacted
by the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic during CY 2023, leading to
supply disruptions or shortages of drug products in the United States. FDA understands
the significant impact this can have on patient care and is doing everything within its
authority to help prevent and alleviate these disruptions and shortages. As a result of
presidential, congressional, and Agency actions, manufacturers are notifying FDA
earlier than in the past about certain manufacturing interruptions and discontinuances
that can lead to shortages. These early notifications give FDA additional time to work
with manufacturers and other stakeholders to identify ways to maintain treatment
options and prevent a shortage. During CY 2023, FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research (CBER) and FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
worked with manufacturers to successfully prevent 236 drug shortages through the use
of a range of available tools, including regulatory flexibility and discretion when
appropriate. Despite this work, during this same period, 55 new drug shortages were
identified by CDER and CBER, as compared to a peak of 251 new drug shortages
during CY 2011.2
Although the number of new drug shortages has declined since 2011, shortages
continue to pose a real challenge to public health, particularly when the shortage
involves a critical drug, such as those used to treat cancer, to provide parenteral
nutrition, or to address other serious medical conditions. In the past calendar year,
FDA has seen manufacturers in the United States and abroad continue to experience
quality issues as well as struggle with capacity constraints. Additionally, as demand
increased for numerous drugs over the last several years as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic, the flu season, and the respiratory virus season, FDA has seen further
strain on drug availability and the pharmaceutical supply chain. Unexpected events,
1 In this report, the phrase “drug shortages” includes shortages of human drug and biological products.
This report individually refers to shortages tracked by FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research or
FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research when the context requires distinguishing between
these Centers.
2 This eleventh annual report to Congress addresses all covered drug and biological products, including all
drugs within the meaning of section 506C(h)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. As
permitted by section 506C(h)(i)(3), FDA included in this definition all biological products licensed under
section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, except source plasma and those that also meet the
definition of a “device.” See Final Rule: Permanent Discontinuance or Interruption in Manufacturing of
Certain Drug or Biological Products, 80 FR 38916 at 38918 (July 8, 2015). See Appendix C for a
breakdown of CBER’s and CDER’s CY 2023 numbers.

[Page 3/30]
such as shut downs at facilities, closures of facilities, and natural disasters, also put
increased strain on the supply chain and drug supply.
Based on FDA’s experience to date and the data on drug shortages presented in this
report, the Agency believes that the requirements related to the early notification of
permanent discontinuances and interruptions in manufacturing and FDA’s own actions
are helping to reduce the threat and impact of drug shortages. Furthermore, FDA has
put forth legislative proposals in its fiscal year 2025 proposed budget that would include
authorities intended to promote the Agency’s response efforts, such as requirements for
manufacturers both to notify FDA of an increase in demand that the manufacturer likely
will be unable to meet without meaningful shortfall or delay and to provide
manufacturing volume and supplier information.3 If enacted, these proposals would
greatly enhance the Agency’s ongoing work to address potential drug shortages. FDA
will continue to prioritize its efforts on this important public health issue, working to
ensure the availability of necessary drugs and biological products for the American
public, including adequate supplies of drugs needed to treat patients with COVID-19
and other respiratory illnesses.
3 See https://www.fda.gov/media/176924/download?attachment.

[Page 4/30]
Table of Contents
I. Introduction ................................................................................................. 1
II. Background ................................................................................................. 2
A. Executive Order 13588 – Reducing Prescription Drug Shortages.................. 4
B. FDASIA .......................................................................................................... 4
C. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act ............... 5
D. FDORA .......................................................................................................... 6
III. Data Sources Used in This Report ............................................................ 7
IV. Annual Reporting Requirements Per Section 506C–1 ............................. 8
V. Continued Drug Shortage Efforts in CY 2023 ......................................... 15
A. Developing QMM ......................................................................................... 15
B. Collaborating with Foreign Regulatory Authorities ....................................... 16
C. Responding to Increases in Demand ........................................................... 16
D. Drug Shortage Assistance Award ................................................................ 17
E. Communicating About Current Drug Shortages ........................................... 17
VI. Conclusion ................................................................................................. 19
Definitions of Key Terms ....................................................... 21
Section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act ........................................... 22
Breakdown of CDER’s and CBER’s Shortage Numbers for
CY 2023 .................................................................................... 24
Breakdown of Expedited Reviews in CY 2023 by
Submission Type .................................................................... 25

[Page 5/30]
I. Introduction
Section 506C–1 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) (21 U.S.C.
356c-1) requires the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) to file an annual
report to Congress on drug shortages.
FDA is submitting this annual report to fulfill its obligations under section 506C–1.
Specifically, this report:
• Provides a background on drug shortages and FDA’s efforts to address them;
• Responds to the specific issues listed under section 506C–1;
• Includes analyses that reflect data collected and evaluated by FDA’s Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) and FDA’s Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research (CDER) during calendar year (CY) 2023;
• Summarizes some important ongoing activities FDA believes will help address
drug shortages in the future; and
• Includes a list of definitions in one appendix, as well as three additional
appendices that include the statutory language regarding annual reporting on
drug shortages and a breakdown of data supplied by CBER and CDER, at the
end of this report.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 1

[Page 6/30]
II. Background
Drug shortages can have serious and immediate effects on providing needed therapies
to patients, and preventing shortages is a priority for FDA. At the height of the drug
shortage crisis, the number of new drug shortages tracked by CDER quadrupled, from
approximately 61 shortages in 2005 to more than 250 in 2011.
Figure 1 shows the number of new drug shortages from CY 2010 to CY 2023. The
number of new drug shortages per calendar year has declined from a high of 251 in
2011 to 55 in 2023.
Figure 1. Number of New Drug Shortages Per Calendar Year (from CY 2010 to CY
2023).1
Due to the work of many, the number of new drug shortages has declined since 2011.
However, shortages continue to pose a real challenge to public health, particularly when
the shortage affects the treatment of serious medical conditions, such as with drugs to
treat cancer or to provide parenteral nutrition. Although there has been a leveling off of
new shortages over the past decade, CY 2023 has been a challenging year for
shortages. For example, the notable increase in new shortages of CBER-regulated
biological products was due to manufacturing problems and quality procedures at one
manufacturer that experienced global supply chain issues related to the lack of some
1 This eleventh annual report to Congress is the seventh to include reporting for both drug and biological
products, which include all drugs within the meaning of section 506C(h)(1) of the FD&C Act; other
products tracked by CDER’s Drug Shortage Staff, such as certain therapeutic biological products licensed
under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act; and biological products licensed under that same
section that are tracked by CBER’s Office of Compliance and Biologics Quality, such as vaccines and
blood products. See Appendix C for a breakdown of CBER’s and CDER’s CY 2023 numbers.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 2

[Page 7/30]
materials and components needed for the manufacturing process. FDA has seen
manufacturers in the United States and abroad continue to experience quality issues and
struggle with capacity constraints.
Shortages can delay or deny needed care for patients, creating a potential lapse in
medical care. Shortages can also lead prescribers to use second-line alternatives,
which may be less effective or pose additional risks compared to the drug in shortage.
As summarized below, FDA has used a variety of methods to prevent shortages,
working within the statutory and regulatory frameworks in place and in partnership with
manufacturers and other stakeholders. FDA’s investigation into nitrosamine impurities
serves as an example of how the Agency has continued to take steps to ensure the
safety of drug products while working to mitigate and prevent future shortages by using
tools such as expedited reviews and inspections.2
In CY 2023, FDA worked with manufacturers to successfully avoid a large number of
drug shortages, helping to prevent 236 shortages. For a comparison to recent years,
FDA helped prevent 317 shortages in CY 2021 and 222 in CY 2022.3 For information
on FDA’s historical prevention of drug shortages, see Figure 2, which shows the
number of prevented drug shortages from CY 2010 to CY 2023.
Figure 2. Number of Prevented Drug Shortages Per Calendar Year (from CY 2010
to CY 2023).
2 See https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/information-about-nitrosamine-impurities-
medications.
3 See n. 2.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 3

[Page 8/30]
Many actions, including the following four, have helped FDA address drug shortages:
• Executive Order 13588 – Reducing Prescription Drug Shortages
• Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA)
• Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act)
• Food and Drug Omnibus Reform Act (FDORA) of 2022
Each of these actions will be addressed in turn.
A. Executive Order 13588 – Reducing Prescription Drug
Shortages
In response to a dramatic increase in shortages, the President issued Executive Order
13588 on October 31, 2011, recognizing that “shortages of pharmaceutical drugs pose
a serious and growing threat to public health[;] . . . endanger patient safety[;] . . .
burden doctors, hospitals, pharmacists, and patients[;] . . . and increase health care
costs.”4 The Executive Order acknowledged the need for a “multifaceted approach” to
address the many different factors that contribute to drug shortages. The Executive
Order directed FDA to take steps—including expediting reviews, as appropriate, and
requiring manufacturers to provide advance notice of manufacturing discontinuances
that could lead to a shortage of certain drugs—to help prevent and reduce current and
future disruptions in the supply of life-saving medicines.
B. FDASIA
With the enactment of FDASIA on July 9, 2012, FDA was given important new
authorities related to drug shortages. For example, section 1001 of FDASIA amended
the FD&C Act to broaden the scope of the early notification provisions by requiring
manufacturers of most prescription drugs that are life-supporting, life-sustaining, or
intended for use in the prevention or treatment of a debilitating disease or condition
(whether approved or unapproved) to notify FDA of a permanent discontinuance or
temporary interruption in manufacturing that is likely to lead to a meaningful disruption in
supply of the drug in the United States. In addition, the FD&C Act, as amended by
4 Executive Order 13588, available at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-
office/2011/10/31/executive-order-13588-reducing-prescription-drug-shortages.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 4

[Page 9/30]
FDASIA, allowed FDA to require, by regulation, early notification of such
discontinuances or interruptions in the manufacturing of biologics.5
The FD&C Act, as amended by FDASIA, requires FDA to send a non-compliance letter
to firms that fail to notify FDA in accordance with section 506C of the FD&C Act.6 FDA
has sent eleven such letters, including one in CY 2023.7
Other requirements added by FDASIA with respect to prescription drug shortages
include improving communication between FDA and the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) regarding shortages of controlled substances.
C. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act
The CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020, to aid response efforts to the
COVID-19 pandemic and to ease the economic impact of COVID-19. In addition, the
CARES Act amended the FD&C Act to include authorities intended to enhance FDA’s
ability to identify, prevent, and mitigate possible drug shortages by, among other things,
enhancing FDA’s visibility into drug supply chains. Specific authorities to enhance
FDA’s ability to identify, prevent, and mitigate drug shortages include the following:
• Amendments to section 506C(a) of the FD&C Act to expand the requirement for
manufacturers of certain drugs to provide information to FDA on permanent
discontinuances and interruptions in manufacturing that may lead to a meaningful
disruption in supply.
• Amendments to section 506C(g) of the FD&C Act to require FDA to prioritize and
expedite, as appropriate, the review of certain applications and inspections that
could help mitigate or prevent a shortage of a drug covered by section 506C(a).8
• The addition of section 506C(j) to the FD&C Act, requiring manufacturers of
drugs described in section 506C(a) of the FD&C Act or of any active
pharmaceutical ingredient (API) or any associated medical device used for
preparation or administration included in the drug to develop, maintain, and
implement, as appropriate, a redundancy risk management plan that identifies
5 See section 506C(i)(3) of the FD&C Act; see also 21 CFR 600.82 and 80 FR 38915 (July 8, 2015).
6 Section 506C(f) of the FD&C Act.
7 See https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-shortages/drug-shortages-non-compliance-notification-requirement.
8 Note that an amendment to the FD&C Act in 2017 also required the Agency to prioritize an abbreviated
new drug application for a drug that had been included on the drug shortage list under section 506E of
the FD&C Act. See the FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017, Pub. L. 115-52, at sec. 801 (Aug. 18, 2017).
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 5

[Page 10/30]
and evaluates the risks to the supply of the drug, as applicable, for each
establishment in which the drug or API of the drug is manufactured.
• Amendments to section 510(j) of the FD&C Act to require drug manufacturers
registered under section 510 of the FD&C Act to annually report the amount of
each drug that they have “manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or
processed” for commercial distribution.
These amendments took effect on September 23, 2020.
D. FDORA
FDORA was signed into law on December 29, 2022, as part of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2023. FDORA included provisions regarding coordination between
field investigators, CDER’s Office of Compliance, and CDER’s Drug Shortage Staff. This
coordination includes sharing field investigators’ inspection reports with the Drug
Shortage Staff pursuant to section 704(b)(2) of the FD&C Act. FDORA also included
related requirements for this report required by section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act to
include (1) a description of the coordination and alignment activities between field
investigators, CDER’s Office of Compliance, and CDER’s Drug Shortage Staff and
(2) data on the number of inspection reports shared with the Drug Shortage Staff.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 6

[Page 11/30]
III. Data Sources Used in This Report
The data used to fulfill the reporting requirements of section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act
are collected by several program areas within FDA. For instance, tracking the data for
reporting requirements related to drugs and biological products (the number of products
in shortage) is within the purview of CBER’s Office of Compliance and Biologics Quality
(CBER/OCBQ) and CDER’s Drug Shortage Staff (DSS). CBER/OCBQ and DSS track
information about drug shortage notifications and their sources (and, therefore, the
number of reporting manufacturers).
In contrast, section 506C–1 reporting requirements related to FDA’s expedited review
are tied to specific submissions by manufacturers that are experiencing production
disruptions or by manufacturers that are adding or expanding their production
capabilities to address a specific shortage. CBER’s and CDER’s offices reviewing
these submissions track which reviews and related inspections they have expedited as a
part of a larger set of activities related to their review of submissions.
Other section 506C–1 reporting requirements for this report relate to instances of
regulatory flexibility and discretion. These specific instances, all requiring separate
regulatory and scientific evaluations and justifications, are tracked by CBER/OCBQ and
CDER’s Office of Compliance (CDER/OC).
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 7

[Page 12/30]
IV. Annual Reporting Requirements Per Section 506C–1
Section 506C–1 to the FD&C Act requires FDA to submit a report to Congress on drug
shortages for each calendar year.
The statutory requirements for this congressional report and the data addressing those
requirements are as follows.
Requirement 1: Specify the number of manufacturers that submitted a
notification to the Secretary of HHS under section 506C(a) during such calendar
year.
For CY 2023, FDA was notified under section 506C(a) of 1,605 potential drug and
biological product shortage situations by 159 different manufacturers. FDA continues to
see a greater adherence to notification requirements, with an increasing number of
manufacturers notifying FDA about potential shortage issues.
Requirement 2: Describe the communication between FDA’s field investigators
and the staff of CDER’s Office of Compliance and the Drug Shortage Staff,
including FDA’s procedures for enabling and ensuring such communication.
To facilitate communications between FDA’s Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) and the
medical product centers, which include CBER and CDER, ORA issued Field
Management Directive (FMD) #15 in July 2012. FMD #15 established drug shortage
coordinators in ORA so that each FDA field district would have a District Drug Shortage
Coordinator who serves as the point of contact between ORA and FDA’s medical
product centers. Each District Drug Shortage Coordinator is responsible for notifying
the relevant FDA center of any issue identified during an inspection or other field
activities that have the potential to lead to a product shortage. Also, FMD #15 clarified
communication roles, responsibilities, and expectations between ORA and the centers
related to potential and current product shortage situations.
For more details on how CDER and ORA coordinates its communications on a regular
basis pertaining to shortages, as originally informed by FMD #15, see next section.
Requirement 3: Describe the coordination and alignment activities undertaken
pursuant to section 506D(g) of the FD&C Act.
FDA staff in CDER/OC and ORA are crucial to the Agency’s prompt response to a drug
shortage. These two groups have separate functions with respect to drug shortages.
First, CDER/OC communicates with DSS on the recommendations being reviewed
within CDER/OC about warning letters and other regulatory or enforcement actions; this
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 8

[Page 13/30]
communication helps determine if there may be an impact on supply and if additional
steps should be taken to mitigate a potential shortage when possible. Second, ORA’s
field investigators typically conduct inspections at manufacturing facilities and report
their findings to CDER. For example, if the investigators identify actions or activities
during an inspection that may have a detrimental impact on product availability,
information regarding the observations and the products manufactured can be relayed
to CDER immediately so that DSS can begin to assess the supply situation for those
products. These procedures are critical to FDA’s efforts to help prevent and mitigate a
potential drug shortage.
In addition, consistent with section 704(b)(2) of the FD&C Act, added by the CARES
Act, DSS routinely receives access to the Form FDA 483 presented to drug
establishments from ORA at the close of an inspection. DSS receives access to the
Form FDA 483s for all drug establishment inspections (i.e., not just those form 483s
required to be provided under section 704(b)(2) when a drug is on the shortage list or
when such a notification has been made available in the past 5 years), so information
on the form is available to DSS as needed. In addition, when OC evaluates a case, the
standard process is for OC (1) to consult with DSS to determine the potential for a
meaningful disruption in supply of a drug considered to be life-supporting, life-
sustaining, or intended for use in the prevention or treatment of a debilitating disease or
condition and (2) to incorporate this information into the case-handling strategy for non-
compliant facilities to alleviate or mitigate the disruption in supply of such drug.
Requirement 4: Provide the number of reports that were required under section
704(b)(2) of the FD&C Act to be sent to the appropriate offices of the FDA with
expertise regarding drug shortages, and the number of such reports that were
sent.
DSS receives access to the Form FDA 483s for all drug establishment inspections from
ORA. By sharing all these forms, the requirement to share the subset of reports
referenced in 506D(g) was met. In CY 2023, DSS was provided with 1,996 such forms.
Requirement 5: List the major actions taken by the Secretary to prevent or
mitigate drug shortages.
Mitigation efforts begin once FDA confirms that a shortage exists or may occur. The
actions FDA can take to prevent or mitigate a shortage include, as appropriate, the
following:
• Identifying the extent of the shortfall and determining if other manufacturers are
willing and able to increase production to make up the gap;
• Expediting FDA’s inspections and reviews of submissions submitted by affected
manufacturers attempting to restore production;
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 9

[Page 14/30]
• Expediting FDA’s inspections and reviews of submissions from competing
entities who are interested in starting new production or increasing existing
production of products in shortage;
• Expediting the release of lots of certain licensed biological products regulated by
CBER or CDER;9
• Reviewing requests for extensions of expiration dating;
• Exercising temporary regulatory flexibility for new sources of medically necessary
drugs;
• Working with the affected manufacturers to ensure adequate investigations into
the root cause of the shortage;
• Developing risk mitigation measures to allow individual batches of a drug product;
and
• Establishing communication channels with stakeholders and other interested
parties.
Depending on the severity of the potential shortage and the surrounding circumstances,
FDA can use one or more of these mitigation tools or seek to develop other options
within its legal authority. When selecting specific tools, FDA continues to work with
manufacturers to tailor their responses to the specific situations. As a part of these
actions, FDA also frequently communicates available information about a potential
shortage or existing shortage to affected stakeholders and monitors any such shortage
until it has been resolved.
List the number of applications and supplements for which the Secretary
expedited review under section 506C(g)(1) during such calendar year.
FDA expedited the review of 259 submissions in CY 2023.10
9 FDA may require manufacturers to submit for review, as well as for confirmatory testing, samples of any
lot of any licensed biological product, together with the protocols showing the results of applicable tests
when deemed necessary for the safety, purity, or potency of the product. See 21 CFR 610.1 and 610.2.
10 See Appendix D for a breakdown of submission types.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 10

[Page 15/30]
List the number of establishment inspections or re-inspections related to
mitigation or prevention of a shortage that the Secretary expedited under
section 506C(g)(2) of the FD&C Act during such calendar year.11
FDA prioritized 35 inspections to address drug shortages in CY 2023.12
Requirement 6: Describe the coordination between FDA and DEA to prevent or
alleviate drug shortages.
If a drug at risk of shortage is a controlled substance, FDA works closely with the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) to prevent or mitigate the shortage. Among other
duties, DEA is responsible both for setting aggregate limits on the amount of certain
controlled substances that may be manufactured and for allocating to each
manufacturer a specific percentage of the aggregate limit (a quota). This tight control
over such controlled-substance products requires FDA and DEA to coordinate when a
shortage of a controlled substance is looming. For example, FDA may work with DEA
to enable a manufacturer to increase its allotted quota of a controlled substance if this
step would help avoid a shortage of the product.
Recognizing this need, FDASIA amended the FD&C Act to include provisions on
improved coordination and communication between FDA and DEA regarding a potential
shortage of a controlled substance. To help streamline and improve communications,
FDA and DEA developed a memorandum of understanding. This memorandum sets
forth steps and procedures, including identifying contacts, for efficiently tracking and
exchanging relevant information.13 DSS reached out to DEA on 55 occasions during
CY 2023 regarding potential shortage situations.
Requirement 7: Identify the number of (and describe) instances in which FDA
exercised regulatory flexibility and discretion to prevent or alleviate a drug
shortage.
FDA’s first priority is to help ensure patients have access to safe, effective, and high-
quality drugs even when a drug is in shortage. FDA’s preferred solution to any shortage
situation is to help ensure that there is a supply of FDA-approved drugs and biological
products sufficient to meet patient demand that also meet the appropriate quality,
safety, and efficacy standards. However, FDA recognizes that there can be risks to
patients if treatment options are not available for critical conditions.
11 This includes prioritized inspections or site reviews for new applications or supplements that were
granted an expedited review due to a drug shortage.
12 Note that not all submissions to FDA require inspections, but some submissions may involve multiple
sites that require multiple inspections.
13 This memorandum, MOU 225-15-11, is available at https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/domestic-
mous/mou-225-15-11.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 11

[Page 16/30]
The Agency understands the importance of using appropriate tools within its legal
authority for certain situations in order to prevent or mitigate a shortage situation. In
certain shortage situations, the temporary exercise of regulatory flexibility and discretion
has proven to be an important tool in helping to alleviate a drug shortage and to ensure
access to treatment options for patients in critical need.
During CY 2023, FDA exercised regulatory flexibility and discretion in 97 instances,
affecting 58 products.14 Examples of the types of situations in which FDA exercised
regulatory flexibility and discretion to prevent or mitigate a shortage are listed below:
• FDA exercised temporary regulatory flexibility and discretion for medically
necessary products that presented quality issues. For example:
- Filters were supplied with a product to remove particulate matter,
- Extra testing for product quality or identity was completed before releasing the
product into the marketplace,
- Third-party oversight of production was instituted to monitor quality issues,
and
- Special instructions were provided to healthcare professionals and patients.
• FDA exercised temporary regulatory flexibility and discretion with respect to the
continued distribution of a drug product to mitigate or resolve a drug shortage
while FDA reviewed a supplement for a proposed change to address a problem
with the drug product.
• FDA exercised temporary regulatory flexibility and discretion with regard to new
sources of medically necessary drugs, including FDA-registered foreign sources,
in rare instances when all alternative approaches were exhausted.
Requirement 8: List the names of manufacturers issued letters under section
506C(f).
14 One instance of regulatory flexibility may affect more than one product. Conversely, a shortage of one
product may involve multiple instances of regulatory flexibility to mitigate the issue. For this year’s report
and moving forward, the methodology will include instances when FDA has exercised regulatory flexibility
and discretion to carve out products from Import Alerts. When FDA implements a product carve-out to an
Import Alert, FDA stipulates additional controls to balance any particular concern with importing such
products.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 12

[Page 17/30]
Under section 506C(f) of the FD&C Act, if a manufacturer fails to provide notification of
a discontinuance or interruption in manufacturing as required by section 506C, FDA
must issue a letter to that manufacturer stating that the notification requirement was not
met. The manufacturer is required to respond to FDA’s letter within 30 calendar days,
providing the reason for non-compliance and the required information on the
discontinuance or interruption. Within 45 calendar days of issuing the letter, FDA is
required to post a copy of the letter and any response received on FDA’s website,15 with
appropriate redactions to protect trade secrets or confidential commercial information,
unless FDA determines that the letter was issued in error or, after review of the
manufacturer’s response, that the manufacturer had a reasonable basis for not notifying
FDA as required.
Since 2014, FDA has issued 11 non-compliance letters under section 506C(f) for failing
to notify FDA about potential drug shortages. FDA sent the first two such letters in
2014, an additional two such letters in 2016, three in 2018, one in 2019, one in 2021,
one in 2022, and one in 2023.16 In CY 2023, FDA sent a letter to Padagis US LLC (on
December 6, 2023). This letter and the response FDA received to it from the
manufacturer are available on FDA’s website.17
Requirement 9: Specify the number of drug shortages occurring during 2023.
The data from CDER’s drug shortage database18 show that the number of new
shortages has significantly decreased since the peak in 2011. There was a record high
of 251 new shortages in 2011.19 Since the notification requirement under section
506C(a) of the FD&C Act was amended in 2012, there has been an overall trending
decrease of new shortages. Despite a slight increase in numbers over the past few
years, notifications have continued to help prevent shortages. There were 41 new drug
shortages in CY 2021, 49 new drug shortages in CY 2022, and 55 new drug shortages
in CY 2023.20
15 Links to letters of non-compliance with notification requirements are available at
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/DrugShortages/ucm403902.htm.
16 See https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-shortages/drug-shortages-non-compliance-notification-
requirement.
17 See n. 16.
18 CDER’s drug shortages can be found at
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/drugshortages/default.cfm.
19 See Figure 1 for CBER’s and CDER’s new shortages per calendar year.
20 See Appendix C for a breakdown of CBER’s and CDER’s CY 2023 numbers.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 13

[Page 18/30]
Another data point to note is the number of ongoing shortages yet to be resolved from
previous years. As of December 31, 2023, FDA had identified 98 ongoing CDER- and
CBER-tracked shortages.
Figure 3. Number of Annual Ongoing Drug Shortages Per Calendar Year (from CY
2013 to CY 2023).
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 14

[Page 19/30]
V. Continued Drug Shortage Efforts in CY 2023
In CY 2023, FDA worked diligently to address and prevent drug shortages, including
by implementing actions to, among other things, incentivize drug manufacturing
establishments’ use of quality management maturity (QMM) practices and collaborate
with foreign regulatory authorities. These and other efforts, which are addressed
below, have helped ensure the adequate supply of essential products, even during
this time of heightened demand, and represent the dedicated efforts of staff from
many offices within FDA.
A. Developing QMM
CDER continues to develop a program to promote QMM at drug manufacturing
establishments. The QMM program aims to encourage manufacturers of CDER-
regulated drugs to implement quality management practices that go beyond current
good manufacturing practice requirements. Adopting mature quality management
practices supports a more reliable drug supply chain. Specific CY 2023
accomplishments include the following:
• CDER published a white paper on QMM21 that introduced the five practice areas
in the prototype assessment protocol. This paper provided examples of
elements within each practice area that may be considered during an
assessment.
• A peer-reviewed journal article on lessons learned from QMM pilots22 was
published in January 2023. Between October 2020 and March 2022, CDER
conducted two pilot programs with separate contractors to assess the QMM of
drug manufacturers. One pilot was for domestic manufacturers of finished
dosage form products, and one was for foreign manufacturers of APIs. These
pilot programs provided valuable insights to CDER for developing its prototype
assessment protocol.
• Following the commitment made at the Pharmaceutical Science and Clinical
Pharmacology Advisory Committee on November 2, 2022, CDER engaged with
over 10 stakeholder groups in 2023 through facilitated discussions to solicit their
input on the perceived benefits of the QMM program, incentives that might
21 See “CDER’s Quality Management Maturity (QMM) Program: Practice Areas and Prototype
Assessment Protocol Development,” available at https://www.fda.gov/media/171705/download.
22 “Lessons from CDER’s Quality Management Maturity Pilot Programs,” The AAPS Journal, January 10,
2023, https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1208/s12248-022-00777-z.pdf.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 15

[Page 20/30]
encourage voluntary participation, and any potential unintended consequences of
the program.
• CDER established a public docket23 (September 15 to December 14, 2023) on
CDER’s QMM program that received responses from 23 individuals/entities.24 This
feedback will assist CDER in further developing its QMM program.
B. Collaborating with Foreign Regulatory Authorities
During CY 2023, there were shortages of drug products from manufacturers in the
United States and abroad, and there continues to be concern surrounding the global
supply chain and the United States’ reliance on overseas manufacturing. There were
four quarterly meetings held with the Agency’s foreign counterparts. Currently, FDA
continues to work closely with its colleagues in foreign regulatory authorities and
directly with manufacturers to understand what the future impact on supply disruptions
might be. FDA is not currently aware of shortages caused by restrictions on exports,
although the Agency continues to monitor for any impact on supplies related to
exports of pharmaceuticals, raw materials, and components. Should the situation
change, FDA would continue to rely on its established relationships with its foreign
counterparts to inform the shortage surveillance programs to inform the public and to
mitigate the impact of supply constraints.
C. Responding to Increases in Demand
Although the majority of drug shortages have historically been linked to quality and
GMP issues, in 2023, drug shortages also occurred as a result of increased demand.
More than half of the shortages seen in CY 2023 were due, in part, to increases in
demand. Due to the confluence of respiratory illnesses, including COVID-19,
respiratory syncytial virus, and seasonal influenza, there have been substantial
increases in demand for many respiratory products needed to treat patients, resulting
in shortages of some of these products, such as cromolyn sodium concentrate. In
addition, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, FDA identified several demand-driven drug
shortages, which FDA was not aware of until after they had occurred. Manufacturers
are not required to notify FDA about shortages related to increases in demand, and
this hampers FDA efforts to prevent or mitigate them.
23 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/09/15/2023-20015/quality-management-maturity-
program-for-drug-manufacturing-establishments-establishment-of-a-public
24 https://www.regulations.gov/docket/FDA-2023-N-3721
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 16

[Page 21/30]
D. Drug Shortage Assistance Award
As part of FDA’s work to prevent and mitigate drug shortages, in 2014, the Agency
created the FDA Drug Shortage Assistance Award to provide public recognition to drug
companies and manufacturers that have demonstrated a commitment to preventing or
alleviating drug shortages. This award recognizes efforts of drug companies and
manufacturers that have worked in cooperation with FDA and have implemented
strategies to help provide a steady supply of drugs for patients at a time when critical
drug shortages pose a challenge for healthcare providers and patients nationwide while
maintaining a commitment to quality manufacturing.
• In April 2023, FDA issued a Drug Shortage Assistance Award to Apotex. Apotex
was recognized for its efforts related to alleviating a shortage of varenicline
tablets.
• In November 2023, FDA issued a Drug Shortage Assistance Award to Sagent.
Sagent was recognized for its efforts related to the prevention of several critical
potential shortages.
E. Communicating About Current Drug Shortages
In CY 2023, FDA communicated with the public and industry stakeholders in multiple
ways—including by publishing guidance documents, articles, and podcasts and by
posting an up-to-date list of drugs and biological products that the Agency has
determined to be in shortage—to provide information about current drug shortages.
In particular:
• In March 2023, CDER published a CDER Conversation discussing the latest in
drug shortages. In that publication, DSS talked about recent drug supply
challenges and offered solutions to mitigate drug shortages.25
• In April 2023, FDA issued a draft guidance document for industry, Notifying FDA
of a Discontinuance or Interruption in Manufacturing of Finished Products or
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients Under Section 506C of the FD&C Act, 26 to
assist applicants and manufacturers in providing FDA timely and informative
notifications about changes in the production of certain finished drugs, biological
25 This piece is available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/news-events-human-drugs/latest-drug-
shortages?utm_medium=email&utm_source=govdelivery.
26 A revision to the draft guidance document was issued in February 2024. The draft guidance document
is available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/notifying-fda-
discontinuance-or-interruption-manufacturing-finished-products-or-active.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 17

[Page 22/30]
products, and certain APIs that may, in turn, help the Agency prevent and
mitigate drug shortages.
• In May 2023, FDA launched an episode of “Q&A with FDA” on drug shortages.
The episode discussed how DSS responded to potential drug shortages by
working with manufacturers to help address the shortages’ underlying causes
and to enhance product availability.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 18

[Page 23/30]
VI. Conclusion
Drug shortages remain a significant public health issue in the United States and a top
priority for FDA. Through important changes in FDA’s authorities, and through
ongoing FDA actions, progress has been made in preventing many drug shortages
and quickly resolving them when they happen. Importantly, FDA’s receipt of
notifications of shortages before they occur provides FDA an opportunity to take steps
to prevent or mitigate them. FDA also works with other stakeholders, including
healthcare groups and patient organizations, to get information about specific
shortages and identify opportunities to resolve them as quickly as possible.
Going forward, the Agency is working to identify opportunities to reduce the risks of drug
shortages. Examples of these include the following:
• Gaining fuller insight into the supply chain. Interruptions or problems in the
drug supply chain can create or worsen drug shortages. As mentioned earlier in
this report, the CARES Act requires manufacturers to notify FDA of API
manufacturing discontinuances or interruptions and requires firms to report
annually the amount of drugs they manufacture, but the CARES Act does not
require reporting of shortages due to increased demand. Incorporating this
“increased demand” requirement would greatly assist FDA’s work to prevent or
mitigate drug shortages.
• Increasing the resilience of the drug supply chain. Drug manufacturing in
more than one facility and more than one geographic region can provide agility
that reduces the risk of drug shortages and helps with resolution of shortages
when they occur. For example, if a manufacturing facility needs to temporarily
close, or its operations are curtailed by factors such as travel restrictions,
quarantines, or natural disasters, it is important to have alternative facilities
available to manufacture the drug or its API. FDA is ready to work with
manufacturers to address these types of needs. Furthermore, an express
requirement that drug manufacturers provide data identifying the suppliers they
relied on to manufacture a listed drug and the extent of such reliance would help
FDA identify vulnerabilities in the supply chain that may be hidden.
Overall, important progress has been made in preventing drug shortages from
occurring, and FDA continues to work to ensure that patients in the United States have
access to the medicines they need. Overall, during CY 2023, there were 55 new drug
shortages. This report summarizes the many actions taken by the FDA to address
these shortages. It also summarizes the work by FDA, manufacturers, and other
groups to successfully prevent 236 potential shortages. Fundamentally, these
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 19

[Page 24/30]
substantial efforts reflect FDA’s commitment to continue its important work to prevent
and mitigate drug shortages.
Drug Shortages: CY 2023 Page 20

[Page 25/30]
Definitions of Key Terms
Drug Shortage: A drug shortage means a period when the demand or projected
demand for a drug within the United States exceeds the supply of the drug.
Biological Product Shortage: A biological product shortage means a period when the
demand or projected demand for a biological product within the United States exceeds
the supply of the biological product.
Meaningful Disruption: A meaningful disruption means a change in production that is
reasonably likely to lead to a reduction in the supply of a drug or biological product by a
manufacturer that is more than negligible and affects the ability of the manufacturer to
fill orders or meet the expected demand for its product. A meaningful disruption is not
an interruption in manufacturing due to matters such as routine maintenance and does
not include insignificant changes in manufacturing so long as the manufacturer expects
to resume operations in a short period.
Significant Disruption: A significant disruption means a change in production that is
reasonably likely to lead to a reduction in the supply of blood or blood components by a
manufacturer that substantially affects the ability of the manufacturer to fill orders or
meet expected demand for its product. A significant disruption does not include
interruptions in manufacturing due to matters such as routine maintenance or
insignificant changes in manufacturing so long as the manufacturer expects to resume
operations in a short period.
Life Supporting or Life Sustaining: Life supporting or life sustaining is used to
describe a drug or biological product that is essential to, or that yields information that is
essential to, the restoration or continuation of a bodily function important to the
continuation of human life.
.
Appendix A Page 21

[Page 26/30]
Section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act
SEC. 506C–1. ANNUAL REPORTING ON DRUG SHORTAGES
(a) ANNUAL REPORTS TO CONGRESS. Not later than March 31 of each calendar
year, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions of the Senate a report, with respect to the preceding calendar year, on drug
shortages that—
(1) specifies the number of manufacturers that submitted a notification to the
Secretary under section 506C(a) during such calendar year;
(2) describes the communication between the field investigators of the Food and
Drug Administration and the staff of the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research’s Office of Compliance and Drug Shortage Program, including the
Food and Drug Administration’s procedures for enabling and ensuring such
communication;
(3) describes the coordination and alignment activities undertaken pursuant to
section 506D(g);
(4) provides the number of reports that were required under section 704(b)(2) to
be sent to the appropriate offices of the Food and Drug Administration with
expertise regarding drug shortages, and the number of such reports that were
sent;
(5)(A) lists the major actions taken by the Secretary to prevent or mitigate the
drug shortages described in paragraph (9);
(B) in the list under subparagraph (A), includes—
(i) the number of applications and supplements for which the
Secretary expedited review under section 506C(g)(1) during such
calendar year; and
(ii) the number of establishment inspections or reinspections that
the Secretary expedited under section 506C(g)(2) during such
calendar year;
Appendix B Page 22

[Page 27/30]
(6) describes the coordination between the Food and Drug Administration and
the Drug Enforcement Administration on efforts to prevent or alleviate drug
shortages;
(7) identifies the number of and describes the instances in which the Food and
Drug Administration exercised regulatory flexibility and discretion to prevent or
alleviate a drug shortage;
(8) lists the names of manufacturers that were issued letters under section
506C(f); and
(9) specifies the number of drug shortages occurring during such calendar year,
as identified by the Secretary.
Appendix B Page 23

[Page 28/30]
Breakdown of CDER’s and CBER’s Shortage
Numbers for CY 2023
CDER CBER
NUMBER OF SHORTAGES
New Shortages 33 22
Prevented Shortages 224 12
Ongoing Shortages 94 4
Notifications 1538 67
Number of Manufacturers Notifying 136 27
ACTIONS TAKEN TO MITIGATE SHORTAGES
Regulatory Flexibility and Discretion 97 0
Expedited Reviews 259 11*
Expedited Inspections 35 0
* This number includes expedited reviews for three biologics license application
(BLA)/BLA supplements and eight lot-release submissions for CBER-regulated
products.
Appendix C Page 24

[Page 29/30]
Breakdown of Expedited Reviews in CY 2023
by Submission Type
Submission Type Expedited Reviews
NDA/NDA Supplements (CDER) 38
ANDA/ANDA Supplements (CDER) 210
BLA/BLA Supplements (CDER) 11
BLA/BLA Supplements (CBER) 3*
* This number does not include the expedited reviews for the eight lot-release submissions for
CBER-regulated products.
Appendix D Page 25

[Page 30/30]
This report was prepared by FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research and FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research.
For information, please contact:
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave.
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
This report is available on FDA’s home page at https://www.fda.gov/.