SOURCE: FDA Drug Shortages – Report to Congress
TITLE:  Twelfth Annual Report on Drug Shortages For Calendar Year 2024
YEAR:   2024
URL:    https://www.fda.gov/media/189325/download?attachment
========================================================================

[Page 1/29]
Report to Congress
Drug Shortages
CY 2024
(Required by Section 506C–1 of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act)

[Page 2/29]
Executive Summary
This annual report to Congress summarizes the major actions taken by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA or the Agency) during calendar year (CY) 2024 to prevent
or mitigate drug shortages1 in the United States. Because drug shortages can pose a
significant public health threat that can delay, and in some cases even deny, critically
needed care for patients, drug shortages remain a top priority for FDA.
FDA closely monitors the medical product supply chain and any impacts that may lead
to supply disruptions or shortages of drug products in the United States. FDA
understands the significant impact disruptions or shortages can have on patient care
and is doing everything within its authority to help prevent and alleviate them. As a
result of presidential, congressional, and Agency actions, manufacturers are notifying
FDA earlier than in the past about certain manufacturing interruptions and
discontinuances that can lead to shortages. These early notifications give FDA
additional time to work with manufacturers to identify ways to maintain treatment options
and prevent shortages. During CY 2024, FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER) and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) worked
with manufacturers to successfully prevent 283 drug shortages using a range of
available tools, including regulatory flexibility and discretion when appropriate. During
this same period, 15 new drug shortages were identified by CDER and CBER, as
compared to a peak of 251 new drug shortages during CY 2011.2
Although the number of new drug shortages has declined since 2011, shortages
continue to pose a real challenge to public health, particularly when the shortage
involves a critical drug, such as those used to treat cancer, to provide parenteral
nutrition, or to address other serious medical conditions. In the past calendar year,
FDA has seen manufacturers in the United States and abroad continue to experience
quality issues as well as struggle with capacity constraints. Unexpected events, such
as natural disasters, shutdowns at facilities, and closures of facilities, also put
increased strain on the supply chain and drug supply. FDA has worked to address
acute shortages, shortages due to current good manufacturing practice violations, and
other manufacturing challenges over the past calendar year.
1 In this report, the phrase “drug shortages” includes shortages of human drug and biological products.
This report individually refers to shortages tracked by FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research or
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research when the context requires distinguishing between these
Centers.
2 This twelfth annual report to Congress addresses all covered drug and biological products, including all
drugs within the meaning of section 506C(h)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. As
permitted by section 506C(h)(i)(3), FDA included in this definition all biological products licensed under
section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, except source plasma and those products that also meet the
definition of a “device.” See Final Rule: Permanent Discontinuance or Interruption in Manufacturing of
Certain Drug or Biological Products, 80 FR 38916 at 38918 (July 8, 2015). See Appendix C for a
breakdown of CDER’s and CBER’s CY 2024 numbers.

[Page 3/29]
Based on FDA’s experience to date and the data on drug shortages presented in this
report, the Agency believes that the requirements related to the early notification of
permanent discontinuances and interruptions in manufacturing are helping to reduce the
threat and impact of drug shortages, as are FDA’s own actions. FDA will continue to
prioritize its efforts on this important public health issue, working to ensure the
availability of necessary drugs and biological products for the American public.

[Page 4/29]
Table of Contents
I. Introduction ................................................................................................. 1
II. Background ................................................................................................. 2
A. Executive Order 13588 – Reducing Prescription Drug Shortages.................. 4
B. FDASIA .......................................................................................................... 4
C. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act ............... 5
D. FDORA .......................................................................................................... 6
III. Data Sources Used in This Report ............................................................ 7
IV. Annual Reporting Requirements Per Section 506C–1 ............................. 8
V. Continued Drug Shortage Efforts in CY 2024 ......................................... 15
A. Developing QMM ......................................................................................... 15
B. Collaborating with Foreign Regulatory Authorities ....................................... 16
C. Responding to Increases in Demand ............. Error! Bookmark not defined.
D. Drug Shortage Assistance Award .................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
E. Communicating About Current Drug Shortages ........................................... 17
VI. Conclusion ................................................................................................. 18
Definitions of Key Terms ....................................................... 20
Section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act ........................................... 21
Breakdown of CDER’s and CBER’s Shortage Numbers for
CY 2024 .................................................................................... 23
Breakdown of Expedited Reviews in CY 2024 by
Submission Type .................................................................... 24

[Page 5/29]
I. Introduction
Section 506C–1 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) (21 U.S.C.
356c-1) requires the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or the Agency) to file an
annual report to Congress on drug shortages.
FDA is submitting this annual report to fulfill its obligations under section 506C–1.
Specifically, this report:
• Provides a background on drug shortages and FDA’s efforts to address them;
• Responds to the specific issues listed under section 506C–1;
• Includes analyses that reflect data collected and evaluated by FDA’s Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) and Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research (CBER) during calendar year (CY) 2024;
• Summarizes some important ongoing activities FDA believes will help address
drug shortages in the future; and
• Includes a list of definitions in one appendix, as well as three additional
appendices that include the statutory language regarding annual reporting on
drug shortages and a breakdown of data supplied by CBER and CDER, at the
end of this report.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 1

[Page 6/29]
II. Background
Drug shortages can have serious and immediate effects on providing needed therapies
to patients, and preventing shortages is a priority for FDA. At the height of the drug
shortage crisis, the number of new drug shortages tracked by CDER quadrupled, from
approximately 61 shortages in 2005 to more than 250 in 2011.
Figure 1 shows the number of new drug shortages from CY 2010 to CY 2024. The
number of new drug shortages per calendar year has declined from a high of 251 in
2011 to 15 in 2024.
Figure 1. Number of New Drug Shortages Per Calendar Year (from CY 2010 to CY
2024).1
Due to the work of many, the number of new drug shortages has declined since 2011.
However, shortages continue to pose a real challenge to public health, particularly when
the shortage affects the treatment of serious medical conditions, such as with drugs to
treat cancer or to provide parenteral nutrition. Although the number of new shortages
has leveled off over the past decade, CY 2024 has been a challenging year for
shortages. As a result of Hurricane Helene in the fall of 2024, the facility of a major
manufacturer was significantly damaged and shut down for reconstruction and
remediation, resulting in loss of manufacturing capacity needed for the supplies of
numerous products. This caused delays in the release of some products, resulting in
1 This twelfth annual report to Congress is the ninth to include reporting for both drug and biological
products, which include all drugs within the meaning of section 506C(h)(1) of the FD&C Act; other
products tracked by CDER’s Drug Shortage Staff, such as certain therapeutic biological products licensed
under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act; and biological products licensed under that same
section that are tracked by CBER’s Office of Compliance and Biologics Quality, such as vaccines and
blood products. See Appendix C for a breakdown of CDER’s and CBER’s CY 2024 numbers.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 2

[Page 7/29]
new shortages and worsening of existing shortages. FDA’s efforts to respond to
Hurricane Helene are summarized later in the report. In general, FDA continues to see
manufacturers in the United States and abroad experiencing quality issues and struggling
with capacity constraints.
Shortages can delay or deny needed care for patients, creating a potential lapse in
medical care. Shortages can also lead prescribers to use second-line alternatives,
which may be less effective or pose additional risks compared to the drug in shortage.
As summarized below, FDA has used a variety of methods to prevent shortages,
working within the statutory and regulatory frameworks in place and in partnership with
manufacturers and others. FDA’s ongoing investigation into nitrosamine impurities
serves as an example of how the Agency has continued to take steps to ensure the
safety of drug products while working to mitigate and prevent future shortages by using
tools such as expedited reviews and inspections.2
In CY 2024, FDA worked with manufacturers to successfully avoid a large number of
drug shortages, helping to prevent 283 shortages. For a comparison to recent years,
FDA helped prevent 222 shortages in CY 2022 and 236 in CY 2023. For information
on FDA’s historical prevention of drug shortages, see Figure 2, which shows the
number of prevented drug shortages from CY 2010 to CY 2024.
Figure 2. Number of Prevented Drug Shortages Per Calendar Year (from CY 2010
to CY 2024).
2 See https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/cder-nitrosamine-
impurity-acceptable-intake-limits.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 3

[Page 8/29]
Many actions, including the following, have helped FDA address drug shortages:
• Executive Order 13588 – Reducing Prescription Drug Shortages
• Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA)
• Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act)
• Food and Drug Omnibus Reform Act OF 2022 (FDORA)
Each of these actions will be addressed in turn.
A. Executive Order 13588 – Reducing Prescription Drug
Shortages
In response to a dramatic increase in shortages, the President issued Executive Order
13588 on October 31, 2011, recognizing that “shortages of pharmaceutical drugs pose
a serious and growing threat to public health . . . endanger patient safety . . . burden
doctors, hospitals, pharmacists, and patients . . . and increase health care costs.”3
The Executive Order acknowledged the need for a “multifaceted approach” to address
the many different factors that contribute to drug shortages. The Executive Order
directed FDA to take steps—including expediting reviews, as appropriate, and requiring
manufacturers to provide advance notice of manufacturing discontinuances that could
lead to a shortage of certain drugs—to help prevent and reduce current and future
disruptions in the supply of life-saving medicines.
B. FDASIA
With the enactment of FDASIA on July 9, 2012, FDA was given important new
authorities related to drug shortages. For example, section 1001 of FDASIA amended
the FD&C Act to broaden the scope of the early notification provisions by requiring
manufacturers of most prescription drugs that are life-supporting, life-sustaining, or
intended for use in the prevention or treatment of a debilitating disease or condition
(whether approved or unapproved) to notify FDA of a permanent discontinuance or
temporary interruption in manufacturing that is likely to lead to a meaningful disruption in
supply of the drug in the United States. In addition, the FD&C Act, as amended by
3 Executive Order 13588, available at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-
office/2011/10/31/executive-order-13588-reducing-prescription-drug-shortages.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 4

[Page 9/29]
FDASIA, allowed FDA to require, by regulation, early notification of such
discontinuances or interruptions in the manufacturing of biological products.4
The FD&C Act, as amended by FDASIA, requires FDA to send a non-compliance letter
to firms that fail to notify FDA in accordance with section 506C of the FD&C Act.5 FDA
has sent 11 such letters since 2014.6
Other requirements added by FDASIA with respect to prescription drug shortages
include improving communication between FDA and the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) regarding shortages of controlled substances.
C. CARES Act
The CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020, to aid response efforts to the
COVID-19 pandemic and to ease the economic impact of COVID-19. In addition, the
CARES Act amended the FD&C Act to include authorities intended to enhance FDA’s
ability to identify, prevent, and mitigate possible drug shortages by, among other things,
enhancing FDA’s visibility into drug supply chains. Specific authorities to enhance
FDA’s ability to identify, prevent, and mitigate drug shortages include the following:
• Amendments to section 506C(a) of the FD&C Act to expand the requirement for
manufacturers of certain drugs to provide information to FDA on permanent
discontinuances and interruptions in manufacturing that may lead to a meaningful
disruption in supply.
• Amendments to section 506C(g) of the FD&C Act to require FDA to prioritize and
expedite, as appropriate, the review of certain applications and inspections that
could help mitigate or prevent a shortage of a drug covered by section 506C(a).7
• The addition of section 506C(j) to the FD&C Act, requiring manufacturers of
drugs described in section 506C(a) of the FD&C Act or of any active
pharmaceutical ingredient (API) or any associated medical device used for
preparation or administration included in the drug to develop, maintain, and
implement, as appropriate, a redundancy risk management plan that identifies
4 See section 506C(i)(3) of the FD&C Act; see also 21 CFR 600.82 and 80 FR 38915 (July 8, 2015).
5 See section 506C(f) of the FD&C Act.
6 See https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-shortages/drug-shortages-non-compliance-notification-
requirement.
7 Note that an amendment to the FD&C Act in 2017 also required the Agency to prioritize an abbreviated
new drug application for a drug that had been included on the drug shortage list under section 506E of
the FD&C Act. See the FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017, Pub. L. 115-52, at sec. 801 (Aug. 18, 2017).
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 5

[Page 10/29]
and evaluates the risks to the supply of the drug, as applicable, for each
establishment in which the drug or API of the drug is manufactured.
• Amendments to section 510(j) of the FD&C Act require drug manufacturers
registered under section 510 of the FD&C Act to annually report the amount of
each drug that they have “manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or
processed” for commercial distribution.
These amendments took effect on September 23, 2020.
D. FDORA
FDORA was signed into law on December 29, 2022, as part of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2023. FDORA included provisions regarding coordination between
field investigators, CDER’s Office of Compliance (CDER/OC), and CDER’s Drug
Shortage Staff (DSS). This coordination includes sharing field investigators’ inspection
reports with DSS pursuant to section 704(b)(2) of the FD&C Act. FDORA also included
related requirements for this report required by section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act to
include (1) a description of the coordination and alignment activities between field
investigators, CDER/OC, and the DSS and (2) data on the number of inspection reports
shared with DSS.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 6

[Page 11/29]
III. Data Sources Used in This Report
The data used to fulfill the reporting requirements of section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act
are collected by several program areas within FDA. For instance, tracking the data for
reporting requirements related to drugs and biological products (the number of products
in shortage) is within the purview of DSS and CBER’s Office of Compliance and
Biologics Quality (CBER/OCBQ). DSS and CBER/OCBQ track information about drug
shortage notifications and their sources (and, therefore, the number of reporting
manufacturers).
In contrast, section 506C–1 reporting requirements related to FDA’s expedited review
are tied to specific submissions by manufacturers that are experiencing production
disruptions or by manufacturers that are adding or expanding their production
capabilities to address a specific shortage. CDER’s and CBER’s offices reviewing
these submissions track which reviews and related inspections they have expedited as a
part of a larger set of activities related to their review of submissions.
Other section 506C–1 reporting requirements for this report relate to instances of
regulatory flexibility and discretion. These specific instances, all requiring separate
regulatory and scientific evaluations and justifications, are tracked by CDER/OC and
CBER/OCBQ.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 7

[Page 12/29]
IV. Annual Reporting Requirements Per Section 506C–1
Section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act requires FDA to submit a report to Congress on drug
shortages for each calendar year.
The statutory requirements for this congressional report and the data addressing those
requirements are as follows.
Requirement 1: Specify the number of manufacturers that submitted a
notification to the Secretary of HHS under section 506C(a) during such calendar
year.
For CY 2024, FDA was notified under section 506C(a) of 1459 potential drug and
biological product shortage situations by 151 different manufacturers. FDA continues to
see a greater adherence to notification requirements than in past years.
Requirement 2: Describe the communication between FDA’s field investigators
and the staff of CDER’s Office of Compliance and the Drug Shortage Staff,
including FDA’s procedures for enabling and ensuring such communication.
To facilitate communications between FDA’s Office of Inspections and Investigations
(OII, formerly the Office of Regulatory Affairs) and the medical product centers, which
include CDER and CBER, OII issued Field Management Directive (FMD) #15 in July
2012. FMD #15 established drug shortage coordinators in OII so that each FDA field
district would have a District Drug Shortage Coordinator who serves as the point of
contact between OII and FDA’s medical product centers. Each District Drug Shortage
Coordinator is responsible for notifying the relevant FDA Center of any issue identified
during an inspection or other field activities that have the potential to lead to a product
shortage. Also, FMD #15 clarified communication roles, responsibilities, and
expectations between OII and the Centers related to potential and current product
shortage situations.
For more details on how CDER and OII coordinate their communications on a regular
basis pertaining to shortages, as originally informed by FMD #15, see the next section.
Requirement 3: Describe the coordination and alignment activities undertaken
pursuant to section 506D(g) of the FD&C Act.
FDA staff in CDER/OC and OII are crucial to the Agency’s prompt response to a drug
shortage. These two groups have separate functions with respect to drug shortages.
First, CDER/OC communicates with DSS on the recommendations being reviewed
within CDER/OC about warning letters and other regulatory or enforcement actions.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 8

[Page 13/29]
This communication helps determine if there may be an impact on supply and if
additional steps should be taken to mitigate a potential shortage when possible.
Second, OII’s field investigators typically conduct inspections at manufacturing facilities
and report their findings to CDER. For example, if the investigators identify actions or
activities during an inspection that may have a detrimental impact on product
availability, information regarding the observations and the products manufactured can
be relayed to CDER immediately so that DSS can begin to assess the supply situation
for those products. These procedures are critical to FDA’s efforts to help prevent and
mitigate a potential drug shortage.
In addition, consistent with section 704(b)(2) of the FD&C Act, added by the CARES
Act, DSS routinely receives access to the Form FDA 483 presented to drug
establishments from OII. DSS receives access to the Form FDA 483s for all drug
establishment inspections (i.e., not only when a drug is on the shortage list, but also
when such a notification has been made available in the past 5 years), so information
on the form is available to DSS as needed. In addition, when OC evaluates a case, the
standard process is for OC (1) to consult with DSS to determine the potential for a
meaningful disruption in supply of a drug considered to be life-supporting, life-
sustaining, or intended for use in the prevention or treatment of a debilitating disease or
condition, and (2) to incorporate this information into the case-handling strategy for non-
compliant facilities to alleviate or mitigate the disruption in supply of such drug.
Requirement 4: Provide the number of reports that were required under section
704(b)(2) of the FD&C Act to be sent to the appropriate offices of the FDA with
expertise regarding drug shortages, and the number of such reports that were
sent.
DSS receives access to the Form FDA 483s for all drug establishment inspections from
OII. By sharing all these forms, OII has met the requirement to share the subset of
reports referenced in 506D(g). In CY 2024, DSS was provided with 2,367 such forms.
Requirement 5: List the major actions taken by the Secretary to prevent or
mitigate drug shortages.
Mitigation efforts begin once FDA confirms that a shortage exists or may occur. The
actions FDA can take to prevent or mitigate a shortage include, as appropriate, the
following:
• Identifying the extent of the shortfall and determining if other manufacturers are
willing and able to increase production to make up the gap;
• Expediting FDA’s inspections and reviews of submissions submitted by affected
manufacturers attempting to restore production;
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 9

[Page 14/29]
• Expediting FDA’s inspections and reviews of submissions from competing
entities who are interested in starting new production or increasing existing
production of products in shortage;
• Expediting the release of lots of certain licensed biological products regulated by
CBER or CDER;8
• Reviewing requests for extensions of expiration dating;
• Exercising temporary regulatory flexibility and discretion for new sources of
medically necessary drugs;
• Working with the affected manufacturers to ensure adequate investigations into
the root cause of the shortage;
• Developing risk mitigation measures to support the distribution of specific batches
of a drug product; and
• Establishing communication channels with interested parties.
Depending on the severity of the potential shortage and the surrounding circumstances,
FDA can use one or more of these mitigation tools or seek to develop other options
within its legal authority. When selecting specific tools, FDA continues to work with
manufacturers to tailor their responses to the specific situations. As a part of these
actions, FDA also frequently communicates available information about a potential
shortage or existing shortage to affected stakeholders and monitors any such shortage
until it has been resolved.
List the number of applications and supplements for which the Secretary
expedited review under section 506C(g)(1) during such calendar year.
FDA expedited the review of 225 submissions in CY 2024.9
List the number of establishment inspections or re-inspections related to
mitigation or prevention of a shortage that the Secretary expedited under
section 506C(g)(2) of the FD&C Act during such calendar year.10
8 FDA may require manufacturers to submit for review, as well as for confirmatory testing, samples of any
lot of any licensed biological product, together with the protocols showing the results of applicable tests
when deemed necessary for the safety, purity, or potency of the product. See 21 CFR 610.1 and 610.2.
9 See Appendix D for a breakdown of submission types.
10 This includes prioritized inspections or site reviews for new applications or supplements that were
granted an expedited review due to a drug shortage.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 10

[Page 15/29]
FDA prioritized 20 inspections to address drug shortages in CY 2024.11
Requirement 6: Describe the coordination between FDA and DEA to prevent or
alleviate drug shortages.
If a drug at risk of shortage is a controlled substance, FDA works closely with the DEA to
prevent or mitigate the shortage. Among other duties, DEA is responsible both for
setting aggregate limits on the amount of certain controlled substances that may be
manufactured and for allocating to each manufacturer a specific percentage of the
aggregate limit (a quota). This tight control over such controlled-substance products
requires FDA and DEA to coordinate when a shortage of a controlled substance is
looming. For example, FDA may work with DEA to enable a manufacturer to increase
its allotted quota of a controlled substance if this step would help avoid a shortage of the
product.
Recognizing this need, FDASIA amended the FD&C Act to include provisions on
improved coordination and communication between FDA and DEA regarding a potential
shortage of a controlled substance. To help streamline and improve communications,
FDA and DEA developed a memorandum of understanding. This memorandum sets
forth steps and procedures, including identifying contacts, for efficiently tracking and
exchanging relevant information.12 DSS reached out to DEA on 90 occasions during
CY 2024 regarding potential shortage situations.
As an example of the impact of increased coordination, DEA publicly noted that in July
2024 they received written correspondence from FDA regarding the domestic drug
shortage of lisdexamfetamine, a Schedule II stimulant used to treat attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and other conditions. DEA further noted that
FDA’s letter requested an increase in lisdexamfetamine quota, which DEA subsequently
granted in September 2024.
Requirement 7: Identify the number of (and describe) instances in which FDA
exercised regulatory flexibility and discretion to prevent or alleviate a drug
shortage.
FDA’s first priority is to help ensure patients have access to safe, effective, and high-
quality drugs even when a drug is in shortage. FDA’s preferred solution to any shortage
situation is to help ensure that there is a supply of FDA-approved drugs and biological
products sufficient to meet patient demand that also meet the appropriate quality,
11 Note that not all submissions to FDA require inspections, but some submissions may involve multiple
sites that require multiple inspections.
12 This memorandum, MOU 225-15-11, is available at https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/domestic-
mous/mou-225-15-11.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 11

[Page 16/29]
safety, and efficacy standards. However, FDA recognizes that there can be risks to
patients if treatment options are not available for critical conditions.
The Agency understands the importance of using appropriate tools within its legal
authority for certain situations in order to prevent or mitigate a shortage situation. In
certain shortage situations, the temporary exercise of regulatory flexibility and discretion
has proven to be an important tool in helping to alleviate a drug shortage and to ensure
access to treatment options for patients in critical need.
During CY 2024, FDA exercised regulatory flexibility and discretion in 107 instances,
affecting 114 products.13 Examples of the types of situations in which FDA exercised
regulatory flexibility and discretion to prevent or mitigate a shortage are listed below:
• FDA exercised temporary regulatory flexibility and discretion for medically
necessary products that presented quality issues. For example:
Filters were supplied with a product to remove particulate matter,
-
Extra testing for product quality was completed before releasing the product
-
into the marketplace,
Third-party oversight of manufacturing was instituted to detect and monitor
-
quality issues, and
Special instructions were provided to healthcare professionals and patients.
-
• FDA exercised temporary regulatory flexibility and discretion with respect to the
continued distribution of a drug product to mitigate or resolve a drug shortage
while FDA reviewed a supplement for a proposed change to address a
manufacturing issue with the drug product.
• FDA exercised temporary regulatory flexibility and discretion with regard to new
sources of medically necessary drugs, including FDA-registered foreign sources,
in rare instances when all alternative approaches were exhausted.
Requirement 8: List the names of manufacturers issued letters under section
506C(f).
13 A single instance of regulatory flexibility and discretion may affect more than one product. Conversely,
a shortage of one product may involve multiple instances of regulatory flexibility and discretion to mitigate
the issue. For this year’s report and moving forward, the methodology will include instances when FDA
has exercised regulatory flexibility and discretion to carve out products from Import Alerts. When FDA
implements a product carve-out to an Import Alert, FDA stipulates additional controls to balance any
particular concern with importing such products.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 12

[Page 17/29]
Under section 506C(f) of the FD&C Act, if a manufacturer fails to provide notification of
a discontinuance or interruption in manufacturing as required by section 506C, FDA
must issue a letter to that manufacturer stating that the notification requirement was not
met. The manufacturer is required to respond to FDA’s letter within 30 calendar days,
providing the reason for non-compliance and the required information on the
discontinuance or interruption. Within 45 calendar days of issuing the letter, FDA is
required to post a copy of the letter and any response received on FDA’s website, with
appropriate redactions to protect trade secrets or confidential commercial information,
unless FDA determines that the letter was issued in error or, after review of the
manufacturer’s response, that the manufacturer had a reasonable basis for not notifying
FDA as required.
Since 2014, FDA has issued 11 non-compliance letters under section 506C(f) for failing
to notify FDA about potential drug shortages. FDA sent the first two such letters in
2014, an additional two such letters in 2016, three in 2018, one in 2019, one in 2021,
one in 2022, and one in 2023.14 In CY 2024, FDA did not issue any non-compliance
letters. All non-compliance letters and the responses FDA received from the
manufacturers are available on FDA’s website.15
Requirement 9: Specify the number of drug shortages occurring during 2024.
The data from CDER’s drug shortage database16 show that the number of new
shortages has significantly decreased since the peak in 2011. There was a record high
of 251 new shortages in 2011.17 Since the notification requirement under section
506C(a) of the FD&C Act was amended in 2012, there has been an overall trending
decrease of new shortages. Despite a slight increase in numbers over the past few
years, notifications have continued to help prevent shortages. There were 49 new drug
shortages in CY 2022, 55 new drug shortages in CY 2023, and 15 new drug shortages
in CY 2024.18
14 See https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-shortages/drug-shortages-non-compliance-notification-
requirement.
15 Ibid.
16 CDER’s drug shortages can be found at
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/drugshortages/default.cfm.
17 See Figure 1 for CDER’s and CBER’s new shortages per calendar year.
18 See Appendix C for a breakdown of CDER’s and CBER’s CY 2024 numbers.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 13

[Page 18/29]
Another data point to note is the number of ongoing shortages yet to be resolved from
previous years. As of December 31, 2024, FDA had identified 113 ongoing CDER- and
CBER-tracked shortages.
Figure 3. Number of Annual Ongoing Drug Shortages Per Calendar Year (from CY
2013 to CY 2024).
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 14

[Page 19/29]
V. Continued Drug Shortage Efforts in CY 2024
In CY 2024, FDA worked diligently to address and prevent drug shortages, including
by implementing actions to, among other things, incentivize drug manufacturing
establishments’ use of more advanced quality management practices, collaborate with
foreign regulatory authorities, and expand communication between field investigators,
CDER/OC, and DSS in advance of and during certain inspections. These efforts,
which are addressed below, have helped ensure the adequate supply of essential
products, even during this time of heightened demand, and represent the dedicated
efforts of staff from many offices within FDA.
A. Developing a QMM Program
CDER continues to develop a program to promote quality management maturity (QMM)
at drug manufacturing establishments. The QMM program aims to encourage
manufacturers of CDER-regulated drugs to implement quality management practices
that go beyond current good manufacturing practice requirements. Adopting more
advanced quality management practices supports a more reliable drug supply chain.
Specific CY 2024 accomplishments include the following:
• CDER developed a prototype assessment protocol covering the five practice
areas described in the White Paper published in 2023 titled CDER’s Quality
Management Maturity Program: Practice Areas and Prototype Assessment
Protocol Development19.
• In January 2024, CDER published a Federal Register Notice20 to solicit
volunteers to participate in the 2024 Voluntary Quality Management Maturity
Prototype Assessment Protocol Evaluation Program.
• CDER evaluated nine establishments as part of the voluntary Quality
Management Maturity Prototype Assessment Protocol Evaluation Program.
Following each assessment, CDER provided the establishment with a QMM
report that highlighted areas of strength and opportunities for improvement.
19 https://www.fda.gov/media/171705/download
20 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/01/25/2024-01423/voluntary-quality-management-
maturity-prototype-assessment-protocol-evaluation-program
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 15

[Page 20/29]
B. FDA Public Communications Regarding Drug Shortages
In March 2024, FDA launched a new portal for patients, consumers, and health care
professionals to report potential new drug shortages directly into CDER’s NextGen
reporting system. Since 2017, NextGen has been a way for regulated industry to
communicate with the FDA, including submitting information on shortages,
discontinuations, and anticipated supply disruptions.
The new public portal allows anyone outside regulated industry, including health care
professionals, patients/consumers, and professional organizations, to submit shortage
information through an online form directly into NextGen. Expanding access to
NextGen’s shortage reporting beyond regulated industry will allow for greater
consistency and ease of reporting by outside stakeholders, improving the reporting
process.
Early notification about drug shortages or potential supply challenges can help FDA
staff take action to quickly resolve or mitigate the shortage. FDA staff investigate
every notification submitted through NextGen to determine if the nationwide demand
for the drug exceeds available supply.
C. Control of Nitrosamine Impurities in Human Drugs
In September 2024, FDA published the second revision of the guidance, Control of
Nitrosamine Impurities in Human Drugs21, which provides recommendations for steps
manufacturers and applicants of active pharmaceutical ingredients and drug products
should take to detect and prevent unacceptable levels of nitrosamine impurities in
drug products. In doing so, this guidance aims to help mitigate the risk of nitrosamine
impurities in drug products while maintaining the availability of critical drugs. The
guidance includes information about nitrosamine drug substance-related impurities,
recommends implementation of new nitrosamine control strategies, and provides an
updated recommended timeline for manufacturers to implement these
recommendations.
When recommending implementation timelines, FDA may consider factors such as
the potential risk to public health, the state of scientific knowledge, the scope of the
problem, the feasibility and complexity of implementing effective prevention or
mitigation strategies, and the risk of drug shortages.
One of the key features of the updated guidance is an incorporated web page that will
21 https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/control-nitrosamine-
impurities-human-drugs
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 16

[Page 21/29]
be updated, as appropriate, when new information becomes available.22
FDA has been investigating the presence of nitrosamine impurities in certain drug
products since 2018. FDA is providing additional recommendations regarding risk
and appropriate actions for manufacturers to take to help ensure drug products
continue to be safe. This will help prevent potential disruptions in drug supplies and
shortages that can result from unacceptable levels of nitrosamine impurities in drug
products.
D. Hurricane Helene
On September 28, 2024, FDA was made aware of the devastating impact Hurricane
Helene had on Baxter International’s North Cove manufacturing facility in Marion, North
Carolina. This facility is one of the largest manufacturers of intravenous and peritoneal
dialysis solutions in the United States, some of which have been on FDA’s shortage list.
A massive effort by FDA and federal partners supported infrastructure repairs and
enabled operations to resume quickly. In just over 60 days, new product was being
released from this facility.
FDA’s engagement included reviews of requalification protocols that were designed to
ensure the quality, safety, efficacy, and purity of products when restarting manufacturing
lines. These protocols included cleaning and qualification of impacted manufacturing
lines and areas, enhanced monitoring and testing for the facility environment, and
sterility assurance activities. FDA conducted regulatory oversight activities at Baxter
North Cove once the manufacturing lines successfully restarted to provide additional
assurance, beyond testing, of the quality and safety of the products manufactured.
Products manufactured after the requalification activities undergo testing before
distribution and are released if all regulatory requirements are met to ensure the quality
and safety of the products. FDA also exercised enforcement discretion for temporary
importation to provide treatment options for patients in critical need during the shortage.
FDA worked closely with Baxter to safely import millions of units of product from at least
four different international facilities.
22 See the FDA/CDER Nitrosamine Impurity Acceptable Intake Limits web page at
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/updated-information-
recommended-acceptable-intake-limits-nitrosamine-drug-substance-related.
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 17

[Page 22/29]
VI. Conclusion
Drug shortages remain a significant public health issue in the United States and a top
priority for FDA. Through important changes in FDA’s authorities, and through
ongoing FDA actions, progress has been made in preventing many drug shortages
and quickly resolving them when they happen. Importantly, FDA’s receipt of
notifications of permanent discontinuances and interruptions in manufacturing before
they occur provide FDA an opportunity to take steps to prevent or mitigate them. FDA
also works with other stakeholders, including healthcare groups and patient
organizations, to get information about specific shortages and identify opportunities to
resolve them as quickly as possible.
Going forward, the Agency is working to identify opportunities to reduce the risks of drug
shortages. Examples of these include the following:
• Gaining fuller insight into the supply chain. Interruptions or problems in the
drug supply chain can create or worsen drug shortages. As mentioned earlier in
this report, the FD&C Act, as amended by the CARES Act, requires
manufacturers to notify FDA of API manufacturing discontinuances or
interruptions and requires firms to report annually on the amount of drugs they
manufacture.
• Increasing the resilience of the drug supply chain. Drug manufacturing in
more than one facility and more than one geographic region can provide agility
that reduces the risk of drug shortages and helps with resolution of shortages
when they occur. For example, if a manufacturing facility needs to temporarily
close, or its operations are curtailed by factors such as travel restrictions,
quarantines, or natural disasters, it is important to have alternative facilities
available to manufacture the drug or its API. FDA is ready to work with
manufacturers to address these types of needs.
• Facilitating the adoption of advanced manufacturing. Advanced
manufacturing is a collective term for new medical product manufacturing
technologies that can improve drug manufacturing reliability, minimizing
deviations from good manufacturing practices, address shortages of medicines,
and speed time-to-market. FDA can help reduce our reliance on foreign
manufacturing by facilitating the adoption of advanced manufacturing for
companies that are willing and able to make the investment. Advanced
manufacturing technologies may help domestic companies operate with lower
costs and fewer quality manufacturing deviations in smaller facilities, improving
the global competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing. FDA has a strong record in
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 18

[Page 23/29]
advanced manufacturing, and FDA has a number of initiatives23 to encourage the
development and adoption of advanced manufacturing that could make reshoring
of drug manufacturing facilities more competitive.
Overall, important progress has been made in preventing drug shortages from
occurring, and FDA continues to work to ensure that patients in the United States have
access to the medicines they need. Overall, during CY 2024, there were 15 new drug
shortages, the lowest in a decade. This report summarizes the many actions taken by
the FDA to address these shortages. It also summarizes the work by FDA,
manufacturers, and other groups to successfully prevent 283 potential shortages.
Fundamentally, these substantial efforts reflect FDA’s commitment to continue its
important work to prevent and mitigate drug shortages.
23 https://www.fda.gov/emergency-preparedness-and-response/mcm-issues/advanced-manufacturing
Drug Shortages: CY 2024 Page 19

[Page 24/29]
Definitions of Key Terms
Drug Shortage: A drug shortage means a period when the demand or projected
demand for a drug within the United States exceeds the supply of the drug.
Biological Product Shortage: A biological product shortage means a period when the
demand or projected demand for a biological product within the United States exceeds
the supply of the biological product.
Meaningful Disruption: A meaningful disruption means a change in production that is
reasonably likely to lead to a reduction in the supply of a drug or biological product by a
manufacturer that is more than negligible and affects the ability of the manufacturer to
fill orders or meet the expected demand for its product. A meaningful disruption is not
an interruption in manufacturing due to matters such as routine maintenance and does
not include insignificant changes in manufacturing so long as the manufacturer expects
to resume operations in a short period.
Significant Disruption: A significant disruption means a change in production that is
reasonably likely to lead to a reduction in the supply of blood or blood components by a
manufacturer that substantially affects the ability of the manufacturer to fill orders or
meet expected demand for its product. A significant disruption does not include
interruptions in manufacturing due to matters such as routine maintenance or
insignificant changes in manufacturing so long as the manufacturer expects to resume
operations in a short period.
Life-Supporting or Life-Sustaining: Life-supporting or life-sustaining is used to
describe a drug or biological product that is essential to, or that yields information that is
essential to, the restoration or continuation of a bodily function important to the
continuation of human life.
Appendix A Page 20

[Page 25/29]
Section 506C–1 of the FD&C Act
SEC. 506C–1. ANNUAL REPORTING ON DRUG SHORTAGES
(a) ANNUAL REPORTS TO CONGRESS. Not later than March 31 of each calendar
year, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions of the Senate a report, with respect to the preceding calendar year, on drug
shortages that—
(1) specifies the number of manufacturers that submitted a notification to the
Secretary under section 506C(a) during such calendar year;
(2) describes the communication between the field investigators of the Food and
Drug Administration and the staff of the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research’s Office of Compliance and Drug Shortage Program, including the
Food and Drug Administration’s procedures for enabling and ensuring such
communication;
(3) describes the coordination and alignment activities undertaken pursuant to
section 506D(g);
(4) provides the number of reports that were required under section 704(b)(2) to
be sent to the appropriate offices of the Food and Drug Administration with
expertise regarding drug shortages, and the number of such reports that were
sent;
(5)(A) lists the major actions taken by the Secretary to prevent or mitigate the
drug shortages described in paragraph (9);
(B) in the list under subparagraph (A), includes—
(i) the number of applications and supplements for which the
Secretary expedited review under section 506C(g)(1) during such
calendar year; and
(ii) the number of establishment inspections or reinspections that
the Secretary expedited under section 506C(g)(2) during such
calendar year;
Appendix B Page 21

[Page 26/29]
(6) describes the coordination between the Food and Drug Administration and
the Drug Enforcement Administration on efforts to prevent or alleviate drug
shortages;
(7) identifies the number of and describes the instances in which the Food and
Drug Administration exercised regulatory flexibility and discretion to prevent or
alleviate a drug shortage;
(8) lists the names of manufacturers that were issued letters under section
506C(f); and
(9) specifies the number of drug shortages occurring during such calendar year,
as identified by the Secretary.
Appendix B Page 22

[Page 27/29]
Breakdown of CDER’s and CBER’s Shortage
Numbers for CY 2024
CDER CBER
NUMBER OF SHORTAGES
New Shortages 11 4
Prevented Shortages 268 15
Ongoing Shortages 88 25
Notifications 1420 39
Number of Manufacturers Notifying 129 28
ACTIONS TAKEN TO MITIGATE SHORTAGES
Regulatory Flexibility and Discretion 106 1
Expedited Reviews 206 19*
Expedited Inspections 20 0
* This number includes expedited reviews for 6 biologics license application
(BLA)/BLA supplements, 1 regulatory discretion request and 12 lot-release
submissions for CBER-regulated products.
Appendix C Page 23

[Page 28/29]
Breakdown of Expedited Reviews in CY 2024
by Submission Type
Submission Type Expedited Reviews
NDA/NDA Supplements (CDER) 47
ANDA/ANDA Supplements (CDER) 149
BLA/BLA Supplements (CDER) 10
BLA/BLA Supplements (CBER) 6*
* This number does not include the expedited reviews for the 12 lot-release submissions for CBER-
regulated products.
Appendix D Page 24

[Page 29/29]
This report was prepared by FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research and FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research.
For information, please contact:
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave.
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
This report is available on FDA’s home page at https://www.fda.gov/.